Custom Blockchains > Add Existing Pallet (#91)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime.md

---

> title: Add Pallet to the Runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Add a Pallet to the Runtime
```

description: Learn how to include and configure pallets in a Polkadot SDK-based runtime, from adding dependencies to implementing necessary traits.
---

# Add Pallet to the Runtime

## Introduction

> As demonstrated in the [Build a Local Solochain](/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/){target=\_blank} guide, the [Polkadot SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank} provides a functional runtime that includes default FRAME development modules—pallets—to help you get started with building a custom blockchain.

Reviewer 2: "modules-pallets-to" did not read well. May be I'm overlooking something.

```suggestion
As demonstrated in the [Build a Local Solochain](/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/){target=\_blank} guide, the [Polkadot SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank} provides a functional runtime that includes default FRAME development modules (pallets) to help you get started with building a custom blockchain.
```

> As demonstrated in the [Build a Local Solochain](/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/){target=\_blank} guide, the [Polkadot SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank} provides a functional runtime that includes default FRAME development modules (pallets) to help you get started with building a custom blockchain.

Reviewer: Not sure if we want to mention this. This section should go straight to the point and not depend on any template or previous section. It should be as generic as possible

> This article outlines the basic steps for adding a new pallet to the runtime of the node template. These steps apply when integrating a FRAME pallet into your runtime. However, each pallet has specific configuration requirements, such as the parameters and types needed to enable the pallet's functionality. In this guide, you'll learn how to add a pallet to the runtime and configure the settings specific to that pallet.

Reviewer: Same here
```suggestion
Each pallet has specific configuration requirements, such as the parameters and types needed to enable the pallet's functionality. In this guide, you'll learn how to add a pallet to a runtime and configure the settings specific to that pallet.
```

> This article outlines the basic steps for adding a new pallet to the runtime of the node template. These steps apply when integrating a FRAME pallet into your runtime. However, each pallet has specific configuration requirements, such as the parameters and types needed to enable the pallet's functionality. In this guide, you'll learn how to add a pallet to the runtime and configure the settings specific to that pallet. For instance, some pallets may allow users to interact with the blockchain by setting or modifying data, while others may manage transactions or permissions.

Reviewer 2: > "For instance, some pallets may allow users to interact with the blockchain by setting or modifying data, while others may manage transactions or permissions."

I'm having trouble understanding this. Could you let me know some pallet examples for both of these scenarios? 

Perhaps, this can be rephrased to keep the discussion around configuring the settings of the pallet, as it starts with "for instance".

Author: yes, I re-read this one and it's really hard to understand tbh, let me tweak it a bit

The purpose of this article is to help you:

- Learn how to update runtime dependencies to integrate a new pallet
- Understand how to configure pallet-specific Rust traits to enable the pallet's functionality
- Grasp the entire workflow of integrating a new pallet into your runtime

## Configuring Runtime Dependencies

For Rust programs, this configuration is defined in the `Cargo.toml` file, which specifies the settings and dependencies that control what gets compiled into the final binary. Since the Polkadot SDK runtime compiles to both a native binary (which includes standard Rust library functions) and a Wasm binary (which does not include the standard Rust library), the `runtime/Cargo.toml` file manages two key aspects:

> - The pallets are imported as dependencies for the runtime, including their locations and versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The locations and versions of the pallets that are to be imported as dependencies for the runtime
```

- The features in each pallet that should be enabled when compiling the native Rust binary. By enabling the standard (`std`) feature set from each pallet, you ensure that the runtime includes the functions, types, and primitives necessary for the native build, which are otherwise excluded when compiling the Wasm binary

!!! note
    For information about adding dependencies in `Cargo.toml` files, see [Dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/dependencies.html){target=\_blank} page in the Cargo documentation. For information about enabling and managing features from dependent packages, see [Features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html){target=\_blank} section in the Cargo documentation.

## Dependencies for a New Pallet

> To add the dependencies for a new pallet to the runtime, you need to modify the `Cargo.toml` file by adding a new line into the `[workspace.dependencies]` section with the pallet you want to add. Ensure that you stick to the following format:

Reviewer: You should not necessarily stick to this format, as it assumes that the pallet is uploaded to crates.io. This is probably the least used one. The most common use is the `git' or `path' field. We could mention the options or give an example.

```toml
pallet-example = { version = "4.0.0-dev", default-features = false }
```

This line imports the pallet-example crate as a dependency and specifies the following:

- `version` - the specific version of the crate to import
- `default-features` - determines the behavior for including pallet features when compiling the runtime with standard Rust libraries

Next, add this dependency to the `[dependencies]` section of the `runtime/Cargo.toml` file, so it inherits from the main `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml
pallet-indices.workspace = true
```

To enable the `std` feature of the pallet, add the pallet to the following section:

```toml
[features]
default = ["std"]
std = [
    ...
    "pallet-example/std",
    ...
]
```

> This section specifies the default feature set for the runtime, which includes the `std` features for each pallet. When the runtime is compiled with the `std` feature set, the standard library features for all listed pallets are enabled for more details on how the runtime is compiled as both a native binary (using `std`) and a Wasm binary (using `no_std`).

Reviewer 2: > ....for more details on how the runtime is compiled as both a native binary (using `std`) and a Wasm binary (using `no_std`)... 

was the intention to link to another page?

```suggestion
This section specifies the default feature set for the runtime, which includes the `std` features for each pallet. When the runtime is compiled with the `std` feature set, the standard library features for all listed pallets are enabled for more details on how the runtime is compiled as both a native binary (using `std`) and a Wasm binary (using `no_std`).
```

Author: yes, you are right. I missed that one

!!! note
    If you forget to update the features section in the `Cargo.toml` file, you might encounter `cannot find function` errors when compiling the runtime.

> To ensure that the new dependencies resolve correctly, you can run the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To ensure that the new dependencies resolve correctly for the runtime, you can run the following command:
```

```bash
cargo check -p solochain-template-runtime --release
```

## Config Trait for Pallets

> Every Polkadot SDK pallet defines a [Rust trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html){target=\_blank} called `Config`. This trait specifies the types and parameters that the pallet needs to integrate with the runtime and perform its functions. The primary purpose of this trait is to act as an interface between this pallet and the runtime in which it is embedded in. A type, function, or constant in this trait is essentially left to be configured by the runtime that includes this pallet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every Polkadot SDK pallet defines a [Rust trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html){target=\_blank} called `Config`. This trait specifies the types and parameters that the pallet needs to integrate with the runtime and perform its functions. The primary purpose of this trait is to act as an interface between this pallet and the runtime in which it is embedded. A type, function, or constant in this trait is essentially left to be configured by the runtime that includes this pallet.
```

> Every Polkadot SDK pallet defines a [Rust trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html){target=\_blank} called `Config`. This trait specifies the types and parameters that the pallet needs to integrate with the runtime and perform its functions. The primary purpose of this trait is to act as an interface between this pallet and the runtime in which it is embedded. A type, function, or constant in this trait is essentially left to be configured by the runtime that includes this pallet.

Reviewer: We should reference the actual `Config` trait from the source code and not the definition of a rust trait

Author: Mmm, I received some comments from @eshaben in some old PRs regarding this topic. She stated that it's preferable to refer to the Rust docs instead of the source code because the source code might change in the future, and that would make our docs hard to maintain

Reviewer: I understand it for this case because the `Config` explanation is kind of generic

Consequently, a runtime that wants to include this pallet must implement this trait.

You can inspect any pallet’s `Config` trait by reviewing its Rust documentation or source code. The `Config` trait ensures the pallet has access to the necessary types (like events, calls, or origins) and integrates smoothly with the rest of the runtime.

> At its core, the `Config` trait typically looks something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At its core, the `Config` trait typically looks like this:
```

      ```rust
      --8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/utility-pallet-config-trait.rs'
      ```

     This example shows how the `Config` trait defines types like `RuntimeEvent`, `RuntimeCall`, `PalletsOrigin`, and `WeightInfo`, which the pallet will use when interacting with the runtime.

## Parameters Configuration for Pallets

Traits in Rust define shared behavior, and within the Polkadot SDK, they allow runtimes to integrate and utilize a pallet's functionality by implementing its associated configuration trait and parameters. Some of these parameters may require constant values, which can be defined using the [`parameter_types!`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/macro.parameter_types.html){target=\_blank} macro. This macro simplifies development by expanding the constants into the appropriate struct types with functions that the runtime can use to access their types and values in a consistent manner.

> For example, the following code snippet shows how the Solochain template configures some parameters through the `parameter_types!` macro:

Reviewer: Here we could link the line of the src code of the Solochain template where this is configured

Author: Same as above

Reviewer: But here, you are mentioning a specific example, so we could link the repository with a specific tag as we already have this in the `variables.yaml` file

Author: yeah that makes sense. CC @eshaben just FYI

```rust

> --8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/parameter-types-example.rs'

Reviewer: If I'm not mistaken, the section where this constants are defined in the `parameter_types` macro, needs to be written in the `runtime/lib.rs` file, and this is not mentioned

```

## Pallet Config in the Runtime

To integrate a new pallet into the runtime, you need to implement its `Config` trait in the `runtime/lib.rs` file. This is done by specifying the necessary types and parameters in Rust, as shown below:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/impl-pallet-example-in-runtime.rs'
```

> Finally, to compose the runtime, update the list of pallets in the same file by modifying the [`#[frame_support::runtime]`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=_blank} section. This [Rust macro](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-06-macros.html){target=_blank} constructs the runtime with a specified name and the pallets you want to include. Use the following format when adding your pallet:

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary to reference what a rust macro is

!!! note
    For information about adding dependencies in `Cargo.toml` files, see [Dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/dependencies.html){target=\_blank} page in the Cargo documentation. For information about enabling and managing features from dependent packages, see [Features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html){target=\_blank} section in the Cargo documentation.

## Dependencies for a New Pallet

To add the dependencies for a new pallet to the runtime, you need to modify the `Cargo.toml` file by adding a new line into the `[workspace.dependencies]` section with the pallet you want to add. This pallet definition might look like:

```toml
pallet-example = { version = "4.0.0-dev", default-features = false }
```

This line imports the pallet-example crate as a dependency and specifies the following:

- `version` - the specific version of the crate to import
- `default-features` - determines the behavior for including pallet features when compiling the runtime with standard Rust libraries

!!! note

>     If you’re importing a pallet that isn’t available on [`crate.io`](https://crates.io/){target=\_blank}, you can specify the location of the pallet (either locally or from a remote repository) by using the `git` or `path` key. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you’re importing a pallet that isn’t available on [`crates.io`](https://crates.io/){target=\_blank}, you can specify the location of the pallet (either locally or from a remote repository) by using the `git` or `path` key. For example:
```

    ```toml
    pallet-example = { 
        version = "4.0.0-dev",
        default-features = false,
        git = "INSERT_PALLET_REMOTE_URL",
    }
    ```

    In this case, replace `INSERT_PALLET_REMOTE_URL` with the correct repository URL. For local paths, use the path key like so:

    ```toml
    pallet-example = { 
        version = "4.0.0-dev",
        default-features = false,

>         path = "relative/path/to/pallet",

Reviewer: Probably we should use the same syntax as above like 'INSERT_PALLET_RELATIVE_PATH'

    }
    ```

Next, add this dependency to the `[dependencies]` section of the `runtime/Cargo.toml` file, so it inherits from the main `Cargo.toml` file:

```toml

> pallet-indices.workspace = true

Reviewer: Is `pallet-indices` correct? Or should it be `pallet-example`?

```

To enable the `std` feature of the pallet, add the pallet to the following section:

```toml
[features]
default = ["std"]
std = [
    ...
    "pallet-example/std",
    ...
]
```

This section specifies the default feature set for the runtime, which includes the `std` features for each pallet. When the runtime is compiled with the `std` feature set, the standard library features for all listed pallets are enabled. For more details on how the runtime is compiled as both a native binary (using `std`) and a Wasm binary (using `no_std`), refer to the [Wasm build](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/substrate/index.html#wasm-build){target=\_blank} section in the Polkadot SDK documentation.

!!! note
    If you forget to update the features section in the `Cargo.toml` file, you might encounter `cannot find function` errors when compiling the runtime.

To ensure that the new dependencies resolve correctly for the runtime, you can run the following command:

```bash

> cargo check -p solochain-template-runtime --release

Reviewer: This command could be more generic. I think this may work:
```
cargo check --release
```

For example, the following code snippet shows how the Solochain template configures certain parameters through the `parameter_types!` macro in the `runtime/lib.rs` file:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/parameter-types-example.rs'
```

## Pallet Config in the Runtime

To integrate a new pallet into the runtime, you need to implement its `Config` trait in the `runtime/lib.rs` file. This is done by specifying the necessary types and parameters in Rust, as shown below:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/impl-pallet-example-in-runtime.rs'
```

Finally, to compose the runtime, update the list of pallets in the same file by modifying the [`#[frame_support::runtime]`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=_blank} section. This Rust macro constructs the runtime with a specified name and the pallets you want to include. Use the following format when adding your pallet:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/frame-support-runtime-macro.rs'
```

> !!! note

Reviewer: I would like a final section that concludes the guide explaining that now the pallet has been added, and the runtime can be compiled and used

> ---

Reviewer 3: I think you can just delete this file since it's the old one

The purpose of this article is to help you:

- Learn how to update runtime dependencies to integrate a new pallet
- Understand how to configure pallet-specific Rust traits to enable the pallet's functionality
- Grasp the entire workflow of integrating a new pallet into your runtime

## Configuring Runtime Dependencies

For Rust programs, this configuration is defined in the `Cargo.toml` file, which specifies the settings and dependencies that control what gets compiled into the final binary. Since the Polkadot SDK runtime compiles to both a native binary (which includes standard Rust library functions) and a Wasm binary (which does not include the standard Rust library), the `runtime/Cargo.toml` file manages two key aspects:

- The locations and versions of the pallets that are to be imported as dependencies for the runtime
- The features in each pallet that should be enabled when compiling the native Rust binary. By enabling the standard (`std`) feature set from each pallet, you ensure that the runtime includes the functions, types, and primitives necessary for the native build, which are otherwise excluded when compiling the Wasm binary

!!! note

>     For information about adding dependencies in `Cargo.toml` files, see [Dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/dependencies.html){target=\_blank} page in the Cargo documentation. For information about enabling and managing features from dependent packages, see [Features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html){target=\_blank} section in the Cargo documentation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For information about adding dependencies in `Cargo.toml` files, see the [Dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/guide/dependencies.html){target=\_blank} page in the Cargo documentation. For information about enabling and managing features from dependent packages, see the [Features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html){target=\_blank} section in the Cargo documentation.
```

## Dependencies for a New Pallet

To add the dependencies for a new pallet to the runtime, you need to modify the `Cargo.toml` file by adding a new line into the `[workspace.dependencies]` section with the pallet you want to add. This pallet definition might look like:

```toml
pallet-example = { version = "4.0.0-dev", default-features = false }
```

This line imports the pallet-example crate as a dependency and specifies the following:

> - `version` - the specific version of the crate to import
> - `default-features` - determines the behavior for including pallet features when compiling the runtime with standard Rust libraries

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`version`** - the specific version of the crate to import
- **`default-features`** - determines the behavior for including pallet features when compiling the runtime with standard Rust libraries
```

      ```rust
      --8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/utility-pallet-config-trait.rs'
      ```

     This example shows how the `Config` trait defines types like `RuntimeEvent`, `RuntimeCall`, `PalletsOrigin`, and `WeightInfo`, which the pallet will use when interacting with the runtime.

## Parameters Configuration for Pallets

Traits in Rust define shared behavior, and within the Polkadot SDK, they allow runtimes to integrate and utilize a pallet's functionality by implementing its associated configuration trait and parameters. Some of these parameters may require constant values, which can be defined using the [`parameter_types!`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/macro.parameter_types.html){target=\_blank} macro. This macro simplifies development by expanding the constants into the appropriate struct types with functions that the runtime can use to access their types and values in a consistent manner.

> For example, the following code snippet shows how the Solochain template configures certain parameters through the [`parameter_types!`]({{ dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.repository_url }}/blob/v0.0.2/runtime/src/lib.rs#L138){target=\_blank} macro in the `runtime/lib.rs` file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the following code snippet shows how the solochain template configures certain parameters through the [`parameter_types!`]({{ dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.repository_url }}/blob/v0.0.2/runtime/src/lib.rs#L138){target=\_blank} macro in the `runtime/lib.rs` file:
```

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/parameter-types-example.rs'
```

## Pallet Config in the Runtime

To integrate a new pallet into the runtime, you need to implement its `Config` trait in the `runtime/lib.rs` file. This is done by specifying the necessary types and parameters in Rust, as shown below:

```rust
--8<-- 'code/develop/parachain-devs/runtime-development/FRAME/add-pallet-to-the-runtime/impl-pallet-example-in-runtime.rs'
```

> Finally, to compose the runtime, update the list of pallets in the same file by modifying the [`#[frame_support::runtime]`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=_blank} section. This Rust macro constructs the runtime with a specified name and the pallets you want to include. Use the following format when adding your pallet:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, to compose the runtime, update the list of pallets in the same file by modifying the [`#[frame_support::runtime]`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/frame_support/attr.runtime.html){target=\_blank} section. This Rust macro constructs the runtime with a specified name and the pallets you want to include. Use the following format when adding your pallet:
```

```

!!! note
    The `#[frame_support::runtime]` macro wraps the runtime's configuration, automatically generating boilerplate code for pallet inclusion.

> ## Next Steps

Reviewer: I don't think these next steps make sense. Ideally, you test the pallet, benchmark it, and then add it to the runtime.

Reviewer 3: If we're going to keep this type of section, I'd recommend changing the title to "Where to Go Next" because this  is used on other pages. It would be nice to bake this type of section into the standard structure of a doc
